The Task Upgrade Scorecard turns those four properties into four practical gates.
Gate one asks whether the output is concrete.
If you only need an explanation, comparison, or brainstorm, keep the task in chat.
If you need a finished artifact, continue.
Gate two asks whether the work forms a contiguous action chain.
The agent must be able to move from source material to action to result without repeatedly waiting for hidden information.
If the chain is broken by unavailable systems or undocumented decisions, use AI as a copilot while the human performs the missing steps.
Gate three asks whether progress produces evidence.
Each important step should return a signal that can change the plan: a test result, schema check, source citation, preview, reconciliation total, or provider response.
If evidence exists but judgment is still difficult, use a supervised agent and add checkpoints.
Gate four asks whether permissions and consequences are bounded.
Reversible work can continue automatically.
Irreversible work should stop before the action and request approval.
A capable agent does not need unlimited authority to be useful.
This scorecard is a practical synthesis of the research evidence, not a table copied from OpenAI.
Its purpose is to translate the shift from conversation to delegation into a decision you can use today.
Consider a spreadsheet cleanup.
The output is a corrected workbook, the inputs are available, formulas and totals provide feedback, and the original file can be preserved.
That task can often reach supervised or delegated execution.
Now consider publishing a newsletter.
Research, drafting, formatting, link checks, and preview generation can be delegated.
The final external send is high impact, so the workflow should stop for approval even if every preparation step passes.
A research task fits when sources are accessible, claims remain linked to evidence, uncertainty is visible, and the deliverable has acceptance criteria.
Asking an agent to decide a high-stakes policy from incomplete sources does not become safe merely because the task is long.
The four work modes are therefore simple.
Use chat for answers.
Use a copilot when the human still owns the action chain.
Use a supervised agent when the chain works but checkpoints or judgment remain important.
Use a delegated workflow when all four gates hold and the procedure is stable enough to repeat.
Chapter recap.
First, upgrade the work mode one gate at a time.
Second, keep irreversible actions behind explicit approval.
Third, choose the least autonomous mode that can reliably produce the required outcome.